the United Nations says the humanitarian
situation in Gaza is growing more
desperate by the hour the UN agency that
overseas aid for Palestinian says its
storage facilities in Gaza were broken
into with thousands of people taking
vital Food Supplies the UN called it a
worrying sign that civil order is
breaking down the Israeli military says
it attacked 450 Hamas targets over the
past day and that it was increasing the
number of its forces on the ground in
Gaza it is the 23rd day of fighting in
Gaza there has been no letup in Israel's
attacks and it has now declared Gaza
City a
battlefield the scale of the destruction
is plain to
[Music]
see we want the war to stop we lost our
loved ones our relatives our
children all my siblings and their
children are
[Music]
gone with hundreds of homes and
buildings in trouble there is hardly any
place left for civilians to seek
shelter a temporary Communications
blackout only added to the suffering of
cousins we couldn't check on our
relatives we've been calling them to
check how
doing but last night we
couldn't people in the streets have
become lifeless bodies
walking Israel has begun ramping up its
ground
operations prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu said the war in Gaza would be
difficult and
long Friday evening more of our Ground
Forces entered into Gaza the stronghold
of of
Hamas this is the second phase of the
war and its goals are clear the
destruction of the military and
governmental capabilities of Hamas and
bringing home the
hostages Israel has been telling
civilians in Northern Gaza to seek
safety in the
South but many gazans fear they might
never be able to return to their
homes our correspondent Rebecca Ritter
is in stot close to the Gaza Border in
southern Israel Rebecca Israel is
talking about the second stage of its
operation in Gaza do we know what this
second stage specifically
entails well they haven't given a huge
amount of detail on exactly what their
military operation is planned or what
what what they've planned as you can
imagine but we are from where we're
standing which is just a couple of
kilometers from the Northeast Gaza
border behind us you can see the city of
bade hon uh we can hear near continuous
strikes both artillery air strikes also
mortar strikes and I've also been able
to hear this morning we actually at the
moment having a little bit of a lull we
haven't has been relatively quiet in the
last few moments but uh earlier this
morning we could hear both heavy and
light machine gun fire suggesting that
there is actually combat happening on
the ground we've been able to also see
through some Zoom some some tanks on the
other side so there we are can just hear
uh an outgoing fire there uh make
landfall in bate hanon and so we we are
seeing and hearing that second phase we
know that they've ramped up ground
forces the Israeli military have ramped
up ground forces inside Gaza and that is
certainly part of the second phase as
Benjamin nety who was calling it last
night uh exactly the tactics we don't
know we think it is less likely to be
this major ground Invasion ground uh
ground incursion that we were first
thinking and talking about we've seeing
those huge troop numbers uh now it looks
more likely that they're going to
continue with this kind of slower e they
did say it was going to take a very long
time and it certainly seems at the
moment that they're trying to encircle
certain cities particularly Gaza
City so you can hear occasionally
artillery fire and no doubt you've seen
some trace of the fighting in the form
of smoke rising over Gaza but I wonder
is there any information trickling out
about the degree of resistance Israeli
forces are getting from Hamas at this
point I'll just say that it isn't
actually that infrequent what we're
hearing hearing uh also fighter jets
overhead at the moment it's actually
being quite constant just at the moment
we're seeing a little bit of a reprieve
although I think it's about to pick up
again in terms of Hamas fighting back
it's almost impossible for us to to know
exactly what's happening on the ground
in fact it is impossible we don't get
these updates in real time and of course
when no journalists or anyone else in
fact is able to get access to the to to
inside the Gaza border so in terms of
how significantly they're fighting back
I don't know they have said Hamas I'm
talking about have said that they are
ready for a ground Invasion that you
know they've been preparing for this it
will have come to no surprise to them
Israel's reaction to the events of
October 7 uh so they'd say that they are
prepared they of course know the the
strip very well they've in fact built
these underground tunnel networks and
and know the the lay of the land
incredibly well they say they're
prepared and they say they're ready to
fight back we do know that a couple of
soldiers two in fact one injured
severely and another one moderately
they're the figures that we have so far
but of course the longer this goes on
the more casualties we're likely to
see Rebecca we only have about 20
seconds or so but I do want to ask you
we understand the communication Network
appears to be working again in Gaza what
do you hear from
there I've actually in fact just been in
touch with a colleague of our in Gaza
they have been able to restore
communication he's been able to recharge
in fact his Israeli SIM card and be able
to again have access to the outside
world uh but we know that the situation
there the the humanitarian situation is
increasingly dire you've been reporting
on it and uh you know that's been backed
up with what he had to say he he in fact
said that he had heard about these raids
these unra raids can hear some firing
again there um that the happing of the
warehouses so people in a very dire
situation uh on the other side of the
Border Rebecca riters from stol in
southern Israel many
thanks let's welcome Ahmed bam media and
Communications adviser for the Norwegian
Refugee Council an independent
organization that protects the rights of
people affected by displacement he joins
us from Aman um Ahmed welcome what are
your colleagues in Gaza telling you
about the situation there
thanks for having me actually uh we
managed to get a short message from one
of our 54 colleagues uh on the ground in
Gaza it was a 58 second message in which
he said that um signal was back network
was back uh but they still don't know
what was happening around them uh he
reported not being able to identify
whether where the sound of the of the
next bomb was was was going to come from
or was coming from um he wasn't able to
know if the rest of his family was alive
or not uh today this morning the the
full scale of what happened over the
past 36 uh hours is is starting to
reveal and the numbers are starting to
jump the number of of killed and injured
hospitals cannot cope and there are
people still stuck under the rubble uh
who were not able to uh to uh find
someone to call the ambulance so um yeah
I mean sadly it's it's going from bad to
to worse in Gaza at the
moment the UN says there are worrying
signs that civil order is breaking down
we in the media have been reporting for
days now that people are running out of
food and water when will that likely
happen for sure and what do you fear the
breaking point will look
like um it is happening I mean we keep
warning about it happening but it is
happening already there are people who
are literally surviving of one loaf of
bread a day plus probably some some
salty water it is happening we're just
not seeing them uh live on television
there are people who are taking turns to
to uh to get hold of a of a bag of of
bread there are people who are spending
5 hours to just find one bottle of
petrol that they can use to pump water
out into their homes I think the the
trickle of Aid that is arriving across
the border from Gaza is giving the
impression that Aid is arriving
and while this is true it is nowhere
near enough so there is a humanitarian
catastrophe already happening we've
heard about you know hospitals having to
uh do without painkillers and children
having to to drink contaminated water so
it is all unfolding and it's all about
now stopping that from getting at worse
from killing more people we don't know
for sure how many people are dying from
from from uh from all these other causes
we know about the bombardment that is uh
intensifying almost everywhere in Gaza
this is why we need more Aid urgently
for those people are gazin responding to
Israeli calls for them to move South of
the Wadi Gaza
Valley um yes yes and and no no because
I've heard accounts of people making
their way to Southern Gaza realizing
that life was not much safer there there
was still constant bombardment we have
seen that you know uh Rockets hitting
and bombs hitting um homes residential
homes and then uh my colleagues told me
about relatives who made their way back
from Southern Gaza to to Northern Gaza
and again from northern Gaza to Southern
Gaza I mean there's there's that tells
me there's no safe spot there's no safe
Corner in Gaza whether that is because
of bombardment whether that is because
of you know the basics of Life the bread
the water the food um and just to say
here finally a rest fight in do at the
moment is getting a full 2 hour of uh of
a nap during the day because there is
just simply no chance you can get any
sleep during the night goodness uh that
is akmed Bam from the Norwegian Refugee
Council many time many thanks for your
time
sir thank
you